HF Trainer: ALST/Ulysses sequence parallelism integration via HF Accelerate (#41832)
huggingface/transformers: docs/source/en/deepspeed.md

```py
from accelerate.utils import ParallelismConfig, DeepSpeedSequenceParallelConfig

parallelism_config = ParallelismConfig(
    sp_backend="deepspeed",
    sp_size=4,  # Number of GPUs to split sequence across
    sp_handler=DeepSpeedSequenceParallelConfig(
        sp_seq_length_is_variable=True,
        sp_attn_implementation="sdpa",
    ),
)

training_args = TrainingArguments(
    ...,
    deepspeed="path/to/deepspeed_config.json",
    parallelism_config=parallelism_config,
)
```

You can also configure sequence parallelism using an Accelerate config file.

```yaml
distributed_type: DEEPSPEED
deepspeed_config:
  deepspeed_config_file: path/to/ds_config.json
machine_rank: 0
num_machines: 1
num_processes: 4  # Total number of processes
parallelism_config:
  parallelism_config_sp_size: 4  # Sequence parallel size
  parallelism_config_sp_backend: deepspeed
  parallelism_config_sp_seq_length_is_variable: true
  parallelism_config_sp_attn_implementation: sdpa
```

Important configuration parameters include the following.

* `sp_backend` must be set to `"deepspeed"` to use ALST/Ulysses sequence parallelism.

> * `sp_size` is the degree of sequence parallelism. For example, `sp_size=4` means 4 GPUs will process a single sequence in parallel. You need at least 2 GPUs to enable sequence parallelism. Please note that SP and DP reuse the same GPU ranks, so with 4 GPUs by default you would have SP=4 and DP=4.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `sp_size` is the degree of sequence parallelism. For example, `sp_size=4` means 4 GPUs will process a single sequence in parallel. You need at least 2 GPUs to enable sequence parallelism. Note that SP and DP dimensions multiply: with 4 GPUs and `sp_size=4`, you have SP=4 and DP=1 (since `dp_world_size = world_size / sp_size = 4 / 4 = 1`)
```

> * `sp_size` is the degree of sequence parallelism. For example, `sp_size=4` means 4 GPUs will process a single sequence in parallel. You need at least 2 GPUs to enable sequence parallelism. Note that SP and DP dimensions multiply: with 4 GPUs and `sp_size=4`, you have SP=4 and DP=1 (since `dp_world_size = world_size / sp_size = 4 / 4 = 1`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `sp_size` is the degree of sequence parallelism. For example, `sp_size=4` means 4 GPUs will process a single sequence in parallel. You need at least 2 GPUs to enable sequence parallelism. **Data feeding**: Each rank receives a unique data stream from the DataLoader (like DP). **Batch size calculation**: The effective `dp_world_size = world_size / sp_size`. So with 4 GPUs and `sp_size=4`, each of the 4 ranks gets different samples from the DataLoader, but `dp_world_size=1` for total batch size calculations
```

* `sp_attn_implementation` specifies the attention implementation to use. Supported values are `"sdpa"`, `"flash_attention_2"`, or `"flash_attention_3"`. Flash Attention is recommended for best performance, especially with multiple samples in a batch, because SDPA may incorrectly attend across sample boundaries.

> [!WARNING]
> Sequence parallelism requires your model to use one of the supported attention implementations (`sdpa`, `flash_attention_2`, or `flash_attention_3`). The `eager` attention implementation is not supported because it doesn't properly handle `position_ids`.

When using sequence parallelism, ensure your sequences are properly padded. Use `pad_to_multiple_of` in your data collator to ensure sequences are divisible by `sp_size`. For example, with `sp_size=4`, set `pad_to_multiple_of=4` or higher.

```py
from transformers import DataCollatorForLanguageModeling

data_collator = DataCollatorForLanguageModeling(
    tokenizer=tokenizer,
    mlm=False,
    pad_to_multiple_of=4,  # Ensure sequences are divisible by sp_size
)
```

> As mentioned earlier SP and DP by default use the same ranks, in which case you only need to configure `sp_size`. But sometimes you may want to make SP-replicas. For example, let's say we have 8 GPUs, and you want 2 replicas of SP. Then set `sp_size=4` and `dp_replicate_size=2`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, when you only configure `sp_size`, DP is automatically calculated as `dp_size = world_size / sp_size`. For example, with 8 GPUs and `sp_size=4`, you get `dp_size=2`. But sometimes you may want to explicitly configure data parallelism replicas. For example, let's say we have 8 GPUs and you want 2 replicas of SP across 4 GPUs each. Then set `sp_size=4` and `dp_replicate_size=2`:
```

}
```

### Sequence Parallelism

DeepSpeed's ALST/Ulysses sequence parallelism enables training with very long sequences by splitting the sequence across multiple GPUs. This is particularly useful for training large language models with very long sequence lengths.

Arctic Long Sequence Training (ALST) uses a combination of sharding inputs along the sequence dimension and attention head parallelism. With this approach, you can train models with sequence lengths up to 500K tokens on a single H100 GPU, 3.7M on a single node, or 15M tokens on just four nodes with Llama-8B. The implementation described here enables one component of the full ALST system. For additional optimizations like TiledMLP and activation checkpoint offloading, refer to the [DeepSpeed ALST tutorial](https://www.deepspeed.ai/tutorials/ulysses-alst-sequence-parallelism/).

> [!TIP]
> For more detailed information about sequence parallelism, see the Accelerate [Sequence Parallelism](https://huggingface.co/docs/accelerate/concept_guides/sequence_parallelism) guide.

> To enable ALST/Ulysses sequence parallelism with [`Trainer`], configure `parallelism_config` in [`TrainingArguments`]. Sequence parallelism is configured via Accelerate's `ParallelismConfig` and requires Accelerate version higher than 1.11.0.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To enable ALST/Ulysses sequence parallelism with [`Trainer`], configure `parallelism_config` in [`TrainingArguments`]. Sequence parallelism is configured via Accelerate's `ParallelismConfig` and requires an Accelerate version higher than 1.12.0.
```

* `sp_attn_implementation` specifies the attention implementation to use. Supported values are `"sdpa"`, `"flash_attention_2"`, or `"flash_attention_3"`. Flash Attention is recommended for best performance, especially with multiple samples in a batch, because SDPA may incorrectly attend across sample boundaries.

> [!WARNING]
> Sequence parallelism requires your model to use one of the supported attention implementations (`sdpa`, `flash_attention_2`, or `flash_attention_3`). The `eager` attention implementation is not supported because it doesn't properly handle `position_ids`.

When using sequence parallelism, ensure your sequences are properly padded. Use `pad_to_multiple_of` in your data collator to ensure sequences are divisible by `sp_size`. For example, with `sp_size=4`, set `pad_to_multiple_of=4` or higher.

```py
from transformers import DataCollatorForLanguageModeling

data_collator = DataCollatorForLanguageModeling(
    tokenizer=tokenizer,
    mlm=False,
    pad_to_multiple_of=4,  # Ensure sequences are divisible by sp_size
)
```

> By default, when you only configure `sp_size`, DP is automatically calculated as `dp_size = world_size / sp_size`. For example, with 8 GPUs and `sp_size=4`, you get `dp_size=2`. But sometimes you may want to explicitly configure data parallelism replicas. For example, let's say we have 8 GPUs and you want 2 replicas of SP across 4 GPUs each. Then set `sp_size=4` and `dp_replicate_size=2`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When using `sp_size` with multiple GPUs, you **must** explicitly set `dp_replicate_size` or `dp_shard_size` to ensure `total_size = dp_replicate_size * dp_shard_size * sp_size` equals your total number of GPUs. For example, with 8 GPUs and `sp_size=4`, you must set `dp_replicate_size=2` (since 2 × 1 × 4 = 8):
```
